# PADUS Wildfire Analysis Tool (PWAT)

**Wildfires are important natural disturbances in fire-dependent ecosystems, but they can pose hazards to society and natural resources when occurring as a result of fire suppression or occurring outside of their historic fire regime** (Parks et al., 2025; Doerr & Santín, 2016). One way that **wildfire risk** can be mitigated is by understanding the likelihood of a wildfire occurring, which is often examined using **fire occurrence modelling of wildfire ignition points** (Miller and Ager, 2013). Binomial generalized linear models, for example, can be created to understand how different human accessibility, vegetative, and climatic variables influence the probability of an ignition (Costafreda-Aumedes et al., 2017). There are many publicly available and remotely sensed datasets that can be used to represent these variables in fire occurrence modelling. ***However, accessing and working with these datasets is extremely time-consuming.*** This represents a challenge for managers and scientists that regularly need to create and update predictive wildfire models for relatively large geographic areas. 

The **PADUS Wildfire Analysis Tool (PWAT)** attempts to address this problem by automating the extraction of data from the Protected Areas Database of the United States (PADUS), a publicly available dataset that contains polygon features of locally to federally protected areas in the U.S. (USGS GAP, 2024). The tool will allow users to quickly join information from the PADUS to their wildfire records. Additionally, users will be able to select wildfire records from one or more ecoregions and create buffered points. The exported data will be displayed on the ArcGIS Pro map for visualizations, and it will be exported into a geodatabase. The individual datasets will also be converted to CSV files, which are ready to use for fire occurrence modelling in other applications (e.g., RStudio). 

References
* Costafreda-Aumedes, S., Comas, C., & Vega-Garcia, C. (2017). Human-caused fire occurrence modelling in perspective: A review. *International Journal of Wildland Fire*, 26(12), 983–998. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF17026
* Doerr, S. H., & Santín, C. (2016). Global trends in wildfire and its impacts: Perceptions versus realities in a changing world. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences*, 371(1696), 20150345. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0345
* Miller, C., & Ager, A. A. (2013). A review of recent advances in risk analysis for wildfire management. *International Journal of Wildland Fire*, 22(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.1071/WF11114
* Parks, S. A., Guiterman, C. H., Margolis, E. Q., Lonergan, M., Whitman, E., Abatzoglou, J. T., Falk, D. A., Johnston, J. D., Daniels, L. D., Lafon, C. W., Loehman, R. A., Kipfmueller, K. F., Naficy, C. E., Parisien, M.-A., Portier, J., Stambaugh, M. C., Williams, A. P., Wion, A. P., & Yocom, L. L. (2025). A fire deficit persists across diverse North American forests despite recent increases in area burned. *Nature Communications*, 16(1), 1493. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56333-8
* U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Gap Analysis Project (GAP). (2024). Protected Areas Database of the United States (PAD-US) 4: U.S. Geological Survey data release, https://doi.org/10.5066/P96WBCHS. 

